Welcome, guys, for this lecture for the performance propulsion and climate engineer.
This is my favourite one of the few,
the performance and propulsion.
We've done bits before, and there's a easy empirical,
semi empirical things we can use there.
But the climate engineering and climate impact and sort of how can we
quantify that and bring that into a conceptual design tool,
this is all quite new.
There aren't any textbooks.
So lots of the stuff here is based on papers and stuff in literature as well,
or in white papers published by institutions as well.
And it's really more towards the cutting edge of conceptual design as well.
So hopefully, you guys find it interesting.
So for this role of performance,
propulsion and climate, how many of the PPC engineers have I got hands up?
Four or eight. Cool. Good. Wonder. No worries.
So for the performance stuff,
this is very much what we already went through before.
It's the stuff you'll be going through with
the aerodynamics engineer to do the constraint analysis.
It's also the mission analysis
and doing the mass fractions and splitting up into sections.
From a propulsion side,
there's simple sort of thermodynamic models.
I'm not asking you to do the full engine cycle,
like working through compressors and combustors and turboes.
But have a good understanding of
how the efficiency and mass of those kind of systems scales at different thrust levels.
And then the final one we'll go through is climate.
And this picture here is for contrails,
which aren't there to set the weather or control your mind.
But actually, there's a growing appreciation.
They have one of the largest impacts on climate of aviation.
So, in general, what are the responsibilities for this role for the development sprint?
It was the constraint analysis,
the mission analysis, and also building this climate model.
And all of these mainly focus on the cruise portion
of the mission in the development sprint.
And also only to consider the design mission.
So whichever mission you've chosen as a team is your design mission for your aircraft,
that's one you want to start building a model for.
Then when you move into refinement,
it's really about assessing the entire mission profile,
go to the climb, cruise,
descent approach, take off all these different segments,
and using your climate model to estimate the impact across those different segments.
And then in your individual presentation for this role,
you can kind of compare what's the difference at
the top levels optimization when you're just
comparing climate impact from cruise to climate impact across the entire mission cycle.
So just a let's start with a quick recap of mission analysis,
the stuff we went through last week.
Within your uh, specification,
the mission profile is defined for you.
And we went through before to how to develop
this equation here for mass fractions for each segment of a flight.
And what this means is to calculate the fuel mass fraction for the entire flight,
we can break the flight down into lots of sections,
and all we need to do is calculate the mass fraction.
Effectively, how much does the mass of the aircraft reduce or
how much fuel do we burn during each section of flight?
And there are specific ones that are
for you can't just take the fuel to get you to Malaga.
You also need the fuel to get you somewhere else if there's a storm.
So there's lots of regulations about how much fuel you have to hold in
reserve at the start of a flight or even end of a flight.
And this has lots of implications.
Firstly, it's a lot of fuel,
and you can imagine it's quite heavy well,
it's quite inefficient to carry that fuel around with you.
So one of the savings that can be made in the next few years and indeed,
one that was made this year is they lowered the amount of
contingency fuel you need to carry by half a percent.
Doesn't sound like much. It's just a regulatory change,
but tonnes and tonnes of CO two emissions every year
have now been saved purely by small tweaks and regulations.
And the other consideration here is when you land with all this reserve fuel,
that is part of your landing mass.
So that sizes your landing gear as well,
which increases the mass of the aircraft,
and you get this snowball effect of increasing masses.
So the key really here for
you is to use simplified equations to calculate each of these segments.
And for each segment,
you're going to really want to be able to calculate the fuel mass burden,
the time in that segment,
so you can calculate the length of the mission in terms
of time or duration of the mission, I guess, I should say.
And then also the distance of each segment.
It's really easy for cruise.
To sort of get an estimate for distance.
But actually, climbing and descending takes time.
If your mission is only 1,000 kilometres long,
you may find that if you want to climb to 50,000 feet for some reason in your aircraft,
by the time you've climbed and come back down,
you've done over 1,000 kilometres.
So you can't take it for granted that you'll reach your desired cruise altitude.
You have to estimate what the distance
you've travelled during climb and descent is, as well.
There's lots of simplified equations for this section that
my recommendation is the Goodmanson Civil Aviation Design book.
That one has the Section 6.2 has all of the equations for each segment of flight,
so you can use it basically just as I don't know,
sweetie shop and pick the equation for your segment of flight.
Now, when you're doing your design analysis or part of your optimization tool,
the key here is to only consider the design mission.
Fundamentally, the first aim of this tool is to estimate mass fraction,
how much fuel you're going to be burning in your design mission.
And so, yes, so starting off,
you're going to go for the design mission.
And we're also going to assume or
the first approximation you can make is assume a constant CLN cruise.
Does anyone know what I mean by this?
So for most aircraft,
when you have your drag polar,
so your drag for every unit of lift,
there will be an optimal CL which the lift to drag ratio of that aircraft is optimised.
So there's an optimal amount of lift the wings want to
make to have the minimum drag or the most efficient experience.
Now, to match that CL,
generally what you would do in
an ideal world is as you burn fuel and your aircraft gets lighter,
you need to make less lift,
so you'll then fly higher to reduce your density so you can get back to your optimal CL.
So an optimum cruise,
as you can kind of see on here has this curve up where
the altitude constantly increases during the cruise segment of flight.
You can't do this in reality,
and I'll say a little bit more why in a second,
but it's a good initial estimate for your design tools to assume a constant CL cruise.
The other thing to consider there is,
as we'll talk a lot more about today,
altitude becomes an important factor in
your design or in the efficiency of your aircraft or what cruise altitude you pick.
So that optimal CL,
you want to work with that aerodynamics engineer
to make sure that the cruise attitude you've picked is
also the CL value that you're
optimising your wing platform and structure around, as well.
And the key thing in all of this is,
don't forget that the atmosphere is in constant as you go up in altitude,
pressure, density, temperature, speed of sound, they're all changing.
I showed you that I put a tool within
the Matlab code for you to be able to pick out the standard atmosphere model.
So make sure you're using it.
I don't want to see people at 33,000 feet still
using the density at sea level for their calculations.
And 33,000 feet is sort of around here, it's 12,012 kilometres.
There's a lot more of the atmosphere,
but there's not much we can really do up here unless we're a hypersonic mission.
Cool.
So that was kind of aims for the development section, these simplified models.
And then what am I expecting from you in the refinement section?
The first thing is in climb and descent,
if you read the specification carefully,
you'll have noticed that below 10,000 feet,
you've got a speed limit in knots and above it,
you have it in a MAC number.
So it's 250 knots below 10,000 feet.
This is set by the ICAO international flight regulations,
but above that, you're only MAC restricted.
So you can't just consider the climb segment as one long climb.
You're going to need to do is break that down into lots of smaller climbs,
maybe 500 foot or 100 foot climbs.
And consider what speed your aircraft is at if it's had to accelerate,
decelerate, and how much fuel you're burning over each of those segments.
Then in cruise, the constant CL assumption is nice, but it's not realistic.
Actually, in flight, you can only change your flight level,
well, you can change it by 500 feet.
But typically, pilots will change it by 1,000 or 2000 feet at a time.
You won't notice it when you're in a plane,
but typically on a long haul flight,
you'll do this sort of step change in altitude as you go along the flight.
And the idea here is to try and keep as close to
that optimal CL as you can during the entire cruise mission.
And then more generally,
just doing the mission analysis in the refinement stage,
the design mission you still need to do. That's the block fuel.
That's what's important for sizing the aircraft.
But for the climate impact and even for direct operating costs,
what you want to do at this stage is analyse all the missions.
So you have a list of 24 flights or maybe a few others with the ferry flights as well.
Some of them are longer, some of them are shorter.
You'll find that it's more expensive per
kilometre to fly short flights than it is long haul flights.
So when you're doing that climate impact and direct operating cost analysis,
make sure you're doing it over all flights within within a year.
And the last point here is make sure
you're communicating with your aerodynamics engineer,
and you are using appropriate drag polars in each segment of flight.
So when we're down here below 10,000 feet on approach,
we're going to be in our takeoff or landing flap settings.
These are going to have different efficiency values associated with them.
One of the key ones for here will be this loiter phase.
So in the regulations and the specification,
you have to have enough fuel to be able to loiter for 30 minutes.
So this is an endurance.
So rather than maximising range is what you do a cruise.
Here, you maximise endurance,
which is a slightly different equation.
But that one's at, I think, 1,500 feet.
So you'd generally be on a non clean flat configuration for that period of loitering.
Cool. So that was just a recap.
We've already gone through how to do that analysis.
That was just to jog your memory and give you more of an idea for those PPC engineers
of how I want you splitting your time over the development and refinement stages.
Does anyone have any questions on the mission analysis segment of this?
No? Cool. Wonderful. Let's move on to propulsion.
So, it's amusing that you kind of just stick them on, right.
At the end of the day, you just want some thrust.
Might as well be a black box,
which gives you some momentum.
And the well, I say that as an lastician, I guess.
I'm sure the people in the engineering building
that work on engines would be quite offended by that.
But the key to aircraft engines is they produce thrust by applying momentum to the air.
So you have some mass flow into the engine.
We can press it, we can bust it,
we expand it, we increase its velocity.
And by adding momentum to the air,
we have the inverse reaction of pushing the aircraft forwards.
Now, whether we have piston engines which are extremely similar to what's in a car,
Ram jet engines, turbo jet engines,
turbofan or turboprop engines,
they all have the same three stages,
slightly different depending on what cycle, but fundamentally,
we're always compressing our air,
getting it down nice and slow, high pressure,
combusting to get a large expansion in the volume,
and then exhausting to bring it back down to
static ambient temperature and get an increased velocity.
So for for a car engine, it's the carnocycle.
Does anyone remember what the cycles called for a aircraft engine?
Turbine engine, I guess.
But have a guess.
Any guesses? It's Brayton cycle.
Now, thermodynamics was the module I did worst at, I think at university.
So you'll be glad to know. I'm not going to require you to do any of
the thermodynamic analysis for the different stages of the engines,
but we want to really look at them at the sort of macro level.
So how do we pick which one of these engines we want to use?
Now, fundamentally, this comes down to what your MAC number wants to be.
At low MAC numbers,
the most efficient way to propel an aircraft is propellers. The reason for this.
The reason for this is for propulsive efficiency,
you want to move a large mass of air,
the largest mass of air.
Instead of moving a small mass of air really fast,
you want to move the large mass of air slowly.
And. Thinking about it?
Tend that didn't happen?
You want to use a large mass of air slowly.
So a propeller can pull in lots of air around it,
really efficient for making frost at low Mac numbers.
And that's why in the early years of aviation,
everything was a pistol engine with
propeller A piston engines were being developed in the car industries.
They can make them lighter, and then the propeller is
an efficient way of producing thrust.
Now, initial propellers had a fixed pitch angle.
And that means they can be optimised for a single curve.
Then we went to variable pitch propellers,
and that means you can get a more optimal propulsive efficiency
over a larger range of MAC numbers.
But fundamentally, piston engines are heavy.
They're simple and cheap, but they're heavy.
So after the Second World War,
turbojet engines came into the four,
which are a much more efficient way or a lighter way,
I guess, I should say, of producing thrust.
Now, the original jet engines were turboprop engines where we take our turbine,
connect it to a big prop.
And these are the ones that are efficient up to around between MAC 0.4 to 0.7.
But with a large as I'll talk about a little bit more in a minute,
with a large diameter,
we run into issues with MAC effects at the tip.
As you increase in MAC number,
turbo fans are the most efficient sort of transonic speed.
And we'll talk a little bit more about this,
and this is what you'll see on most aircraft nowadays.
But fundamentally, all three of these have
a turbine with a different fan at the front of it.
So talking a little bit at the macro level about turbofan engines.
There are four key parameters for
turbofan engines for a sort of a conceptual design engineer.
The first is the bypass ratio.
This is how much air do we move around the turbine rather than through the turbine.
It's inefficient. Basically, if you're
putting a lot of energy into the flow and making it hot, it's not moving.
That's a waste of energy. The most efficient way to create
pulsion is to accelerate the flow without heating it.
So the more air we can get going through the bypass,
the more efficient our engine can be.
The next key parameter is turbine exit temperature,
which is the temperature,
the exit of the combustion chamber.
Or exit the turbine, I guess.
These can reach 1,900 Kelvin there,
or the next generation will reach 2000 elvit.
That's above the melting point of steel.
It's above the usability point of tungsten.
Tungsten starts to creep at those speeds.
It's insanely complicated engineering for
the crystalline ceramic structures that are
used on these turbines to make sure they don't melt.
The next key one is overall pressure ratio.
This is the compression ratio from the atmospheric conditions into the combustor.
And then the last one is specific fuel consumption.
What is your fuel flow rate for a given thrust?
Now the main benefit of turbo fans
is they have a large increase of efficiency, like I said,
but they have a large frontal area,
and they can be quite troublesome to fit on an aircraft.
I'm sure you may have all seen a 737 with its non circular intake.
It's just because they had to move the gearbox to
the side of the turbo fan just to make sure I had
enough clearance on the landing gear
so they didn't have to redesign the landing gear on the 737.
Now, I won't be asking you to do too much thermodynamics,
but the key ones to remember,
are you have your atmospheric conditions coming into the turbine.
You can then change them to static pressures and temperatures
using your general relationships.
Then if you're assuming isentropic compression or compression across the fan,
then you can use isentropic relations to estimate what
the pressure and temperature are entering the combustor,
which will be important for the climate impacts later.
Now, for you on this project,
you can't I'm not expecting you to design a new generation of turbofan engines,
and lots of things are sort of fixed between generations,
particularly the compression ratio or
maximum pressure ratio and the turbine exit temperature.
These so what I'm going
to get you to do is just assume you're using the current generation of turbofans,
so these ones are effectively fixed.
However, it's defensible to be able to vary the bypass ratio.
This has a sort of trade off.
Bigger bypass ratio is more efficient, but it's also heavier,
and it's also harder to integrate into your aircraft.
So at first, as a first sort of estimate of weights, lengths, masses,
and specific fuel consumptions,
there's these generic equations from RMA,
which have been matched across current engine types.
So the aim here would be for you to use a rubberized process.
This is typically what you do is there's only a certain amount of engines you can pick.
You can't go to Roy Royce and say,
I'd like an engine with Newtons of thrust Ps.
They'll just tell you you can have one of these ones,
unless your name is Airbus or Boeing, I guess.
But for conceptual design,
what we do is we take known parameters from an engine,
and we sort of stretch that engine for different thrust levels.
And these equations are really about taking known parameters from
a known engine and then scaling them through your design process.
So what you have to make sure is you've picked
a reference engine that is suitable for the scale of aircraft you're looking at.
And one important thing to note here, again,
about the bypass ratio is there's a link here with the landing gear engineer.
When there's a regulation that on the ground or for,
like, a landing where you do one wheel landings,
there has to be a five degree angle between
the outer landing gear and the cell of the engine.
So there's integrations with both aerodynamics and
the landing gear engineers for propulsive and structural engineers,
as well for the propulsive choices.
So that gives you what you'll notice down here is this
gives you different specific fuel consumptions for Max thrust,
This is take off and then for crews as well.
The difference here is, as engines are optimised for one specific flight condition.
So the compression ratio is rather fixed.
Okay, you can change the speed of the turbines,
but there's not much variation in there.
And also, there'll be an optimal exit temperature or turbine exit temperature.
These only work at one specific condition.
Away from that condition,
engines will be sub optimal or the specific fuel consumption changes.
Now, given two known values for the maximum and the specific fuel consumption,
there's standard relations you can use which look at the static pressure at your altitude
compared to sea level and
your MAX number to give you an estimate for the variation in specific fuel consumption.
And here, Beta is a value you tune for a given MX thrust and a given cruise,
you can work out what Beta needs to be to give you
this thrust specific fuel consumption for your MAX and altitude of choice.
Switching to turbo props,
effectively, these are turbo fans with a very large bypass ratio.
The turbo prop brings in a large mass of air,
and you're looking at effective bypass ratios 4100-1.
As I said before, these have good efficiencies at low MAC numbers.
But as you increase in MAC number,
these large diameter fans spin quite fast,
so the local speed at the tips can reach supersonic speeds.
And the efficiency drops off
dramatically when this starts to happen or when the blades start to stall.
So on higher end turbo props,
you'll start to see these sort of curved tips to the fan blades.
The idea here is to try and reduce the local mac number towards the tip.
And these are also counter rotating turbo props,
which increase the efficiency.
Effectively, you want to convert all your energy to moving the air backwards,
but with one prop, you add swell to the flow as well.
So if you have a counter rotating prop behind the first one,
you can kind of remove that swell to make sure as much of
your energy is moving the flow backwards rather than rotating.
Now, one of the catches here is compared to turbo fans.
Turbo props are generally measured in power,
so you have to convert this to thrust.
And also, you have to calculate the propeller efficiency as well.
So for power.
I got that the wrong way around?
I've got that the wrong way around I've put it in twice.
I've put it in twice the wrong way around.
This should be the proper efficiency over velocity.
So you need to convert when you look in the documents for turboprops,
they'll give you a power specific fuel consumption.
You need to convert this to a thrust specific fuel consumption.
And the other tricky one at the conceptual level is
working out what your propeller efficiency needs to be.
Um, these are tuned to every single turbine blade,
so it's quite hard to pick a value at conceptual level, particularly for you guys,
where you want to scale between MAC numbers
and different velocities and attitudes, as well.
As a first guess, after a certain MAC number,
you can have a sort of a parabolic drop off.
And indeed, in the example code I've given you,
that's what I've implemented.
But it's really up to you to,
if you want to use turboprop engines to ensure that you're happy
with how that propeller efficiency is dropping off at higher MAC numbers.
And just to re emphasise here,
everything I've said here about different types of
propulsors is I've done most of it for you.
If you look in the code in the cast dot name space,
there's two classes, one for turbofan, one for turboprop.
I've tuned these to two specific engines I picked,
I think for the CFM 51 and the was it PWM 100,
whichever one's on the A 400.
These may not be suitable turbo props or turbo fans for your design.
So really use them as a starting point and change the values depending on
whatever engine you think is suitable for whichever design you guys are looking at.
As a curiosity between your concepts,
how many of you are going to want to use something that isn't a turbofan engine?
Cool. I didn't need the last two slides.
That was easier. Cool. Okay. Wonderful.
So propulsion, performance, propulsion and climate.
So we've ticked off two of them.
One to go climate impact.
Now, the first question really is how bad is aviation, really?
So aviation accounts for roughly 2.5% of global CO two emissions.
And the key issue here is,
it's very hard to reduce the carbon impact of aviation.
Lots of other industries and countries to
better or worse effects are aiming for net zero by 2050.
This effectively means they're planting lots of trees,
which doesn't really stop them emitting the carbon, but that's a different question.
But if you go by these metrics and everyone moves to net zero,
by 2050, aviation could actually account for 20% of global emissions.
So action really needs to be taken.
Otherwise, there's going to be a lot of pressure in the 30s and
40s on aviation to rapidly reduce its carbon emissions.
But is it we've always been told per kilometre,
actually, aviation is quite efficient.
So, for these different modes of transport here,
have a think which ones have a chat Msels?
Which ones do you think have more carbon emissions than aviation?
Oh
So which one
do we reckon is the worst offender?
Yeah, one passenger petrol cars probably going to be up there.
Does anyone think any of the others are going to be higher than aviation as well?
Memoring this is per kilometre.
So the surprising answer it surprised me at the time when I first saw these as well.
It's not even efficient per kilometre.
So petrol car per one passenger,
that is worst case,
but only by a few grammes.
Every other form of transport is actually much more efficient per kilometre travelled.
And that's not even the worst of it,
because climate change isn't just about carbon emissions,
although everyone likes to move it towards CO two,
there are other greenhouse gases and other effects that increase climate impact.
When you account for these, as well,
aviation is almost double the next form of transport.
And aviation accounts for 4% of all anthropogenic forcing.
This is climate impact by man.
So there's a bit of a problem here,
and that's our job as engineers to sort of,
or aviation engineers is to reduce this climate impact.
Luckily, that's also generally tied to reducing the cost of flights.
One of the other key issues is the number of
flights is only predicted to grow over the next 30 years.
Now, there's different things we can do as
an industry to reduce our carbon emissions given this growth.
We can move to ultra efficient designs.
We can go for zero carbon fuels.
We can try and reduce operational constraints as well.
For example, one of the largest efficiencies recent well,
I say recently in the last two decades.
Has been reducing the Etops ratings.
When you guys were children,
if you went on a long haul flight,
it was probably on a 747 or an 83 30 or an 8380,
a four engine aircraft model.
Reason here was engine out operations
restricted the distance that
a two engine aircraft could be away from land or somewhere it could land.
But in the 2010,
with the what's the word I'm looking for?
The reliability of turbo fans increasing the reliability of aviation,
new aircraft like the Dreamliner were given and now
even the A 321 have been given ETOps ratings that allow them to transatlantic flights.
So two dreamliners can carry the same amount of people as the 747,
but it has 20% less carbon emissions flying them across the Atlantic.
There are other things you can do as well,
like less restrictive flight corridors or moving to electric taxing.
And there's also regulatory changes that can happen as well.
So CorcIA is a European scheme that's aiming to put cost on emissions.
It takes the emissions from 2022,
and that's effectively each company's carbon budget.
We can also tax emissions.
This is a controversial one,
particularly in the UK, there is no VAT paid on aviation fuel,
but there is on train fares,
which may unfairly penalise other forms of transport compared to aviation.
But we like having cheap flights.
The other thing to consider is the distance flown by aircraft.
So this is a map of a mission per sort of distance.
So we can break flights down into three different lengths.
We've got short haul flights.
That's my latest too. All right.
Short haul flights, medium haul flights, and long haul flights.
Now, new technologies that are coming through like electric aircraft could
potentially get distances 500-1 thousand kilometres,
maybe a little bit more at stretch.
So potentially the short haul flights,
London to Manchester, London to Paris.
These ones could be done by electric aircraft.
Medium haul flights up to around 4,000 kilometres.
This is your 8320 and your 73 sevens of the world.
These potentially hydrogen fuel cells are an option,
but definitely not electric at this stage.
But for long haul flights,
even looking forward to 2050,
it's going to require some form of combustion.
Now, the likely choice here is probably going to be sustainable aviation fuel,
but it could also be hydrogen.
But the key here is for longhul flights,
we're still going to be combusting things in the atmosphere.
And the untold truth here is both
sustainable aviation fuel and hydrogen fuel are projected to be expensive,
even in the most optimistic of scenarios for 2050.
So kind of a take home is we're likely living in a golden age for aviation.
The prices of flights will probably not be this cheap relative
to purchasing power again for the foreseeable future.
So with that in mind,
we want to be able to measure the climate impact of
aviation and particularly for your conceptual design tools as well.
And the first question is,
why should we try and measure these these climate impact?
One is to actually get some publicity about
it and form public opinion and have tools to inform policy, as well.
How much do you want to reduce the emissions by?
One important note here that I
think is interesting is we're actually at a fork in the road.
Between the 1940s and the 2000s,
Academia's goal of green aviation and
industry's goal of cheap aviation were synonyms for each other.
If you could make aviation cheaper,
you're also burning less fuel, you're making it cheaper.
Actually, nowadays, we're at more of a fork in the road.
Cheap aviation is still about making more efficient kerosene aircraft,
whereas green aviation is going in
a different direction that industry may not want to go in.
So there's an interesting pull here of how can
policymakers change the direction of industry to move towards green aviation.
So we want to measure impact,
but how can we measure it?
We need a quantitative way of estimating
the impact of all pollutants emitted by aviation.
And we can't just consider them at the moment they were emitted.
We have to consider them over their entire life cycle.
So the first metric is radiative forcing.
And this is the instantaneous change in
the Earth's energy balance caused by a climate driver,
be it that CO two or NOS or ozone or something else.
And this is expressed in terms of power per unit area.
And this is a diagram of sort of radiative forcing over it over a year,
I think in 2004.
So you have your energy inputs from the sun and then, you know,
reflected up by clouds or absorbed or reflected down from greenhouse gases,
you've all seen these things before.
So we're in our combustion aircraft, what's actually emitted.
So burning one kilo of fuel
is purely by looking at the chemistry and the chemical reaction.
We get about 3.2 kilos of CO two,
1.3 kilos of water,
a small amount of sulphates, some soot, as well.
These like particulates and some nitrous oxides as well.
Now, these are all purely dependent on how much fuel you burn,
but nitrous oxide is actually more dependent on the combustor environment, as well.
So to calculate how much NO two NOX is being made,
you have to know the combustor pressure
and temperature and the relative humidity as well.
The other thing is aircraft also produce contrails above a certain height.
Water crystallises around soot particles and
other particulates in the plume to create those classical contrails,
which may turn into cirrus clouds as well.
And the classical term for this in academia is aircraft induced cloudiness.
I don't know why, to be honest, contrails seem fighting.
I guess it's to get away from all the
like the US trying to control your mind or something.
So how do we get from okay,
we're burning 3.2 kilogrammes of CO two.
How do we convert that into a radiative forcing factor?
Because we have lots of different sources,
the first thing we want to do is try and normalise them against some metric.
So the chosen metric is generally the radiative forcing from
doubling the concentration of CO two in the atmosphere is 3.7 watts per metre squared.
We then calculate the radiative forcing of each element,
and we'll go through this for each one,
and then we times it by some efficacy factor,
which basically says, how much of a greenhouse gas is this species.
So the take homes here I don't know why I've done on two slides.
Anyway, the take homes here is actually the worst greenhouse gas is ozone,
then followed by water and methane,
then followed by CO two,
although we are producing much more CO two than water.
But it's interesting that effectively even from this quick analysis,
you can see that 25% of
radiative forcing comes from the water that's emitted rather than the CO two.
But radiative forcing isn't the whole picture.
It's telling us the instantaneous amount of energy being added to the system effectively.
But different elements last for different periods in the atmosphere.
So the half life of water in that atmosphere is weeks,
whereas the half life of CO two is hundreds of years.
It still up for debate,
but it's maybe somewhere 100-500 years for
the half life or to remove the CO two you've added to the atmosphere.
So how do we capture this radiative forcing
over the lifespan of each species?
And here jumps in something called the average temperature response,
and this is what I'd like you to use in your climate impact models.
Now, what this does is it averages the surface temperature over years.
So if we go back to this plot,
you can imagine, effectively,
you draw a line and you say, this line,
this is the average temperature increase
each year to give me the same area under the curve.
It was proposed in 2011,
and there's this horizon that you choose,
how many years you pick.
There's been variations over the years,
but relatively there's an EU project currently running called Claim.
They've done a large literature survey and different reviews,
and there's a growing consensus that 100 year horizon is a good way of using this tool.
It's a good balance between short term effects,
such as contrails and ozone and long term effects,
such as CO two emissions.
There are other metrics as well.
I completely forgot what it was called.
GW is weighted global weighted potential, something.
This one basically is the sum total of the area underneath.
This is one that's used in all climate policies.
So typically, if you see something
from a government or an institution talking about reducing climate emissions,
generally, they're talking about the global weighted potential of each species.
So given our so for this,
we need to work out what the average temperature
response or the change in the temperature is each year.
And from this, we have our radiative forcing.
This is the energy input into the system.
And we have this GT term,
which is effectively modelling the thermal response of the Earth or
the surface temperature of the Earth to this radiative forcing.
So all that's left here to do is then calculate this
normalised radiative forcing term for each of the different species.
Before we do that, one last point,
though, is altitude dependence.
Now, long lasting pollutants like CO two,
it doesn't actually matter where you put them in the atmosphere.
If you put them at zero feet or 30,000 feet,
they're going to have the same impact over their lifetime.
However, for other pollutants such as ozone,
methane or methane or aircraft induced cloudiness,
it's highly dependent on what altitude you're flying.
Aircraft induced cloudiness is a bit of a misnomer really putting on here.
There are other metrics you can use,
but this is a good baseline metric for you to use in your sizing tools.
So below a critical height,
there are no contrails produced by an aircraft.
As soon as you go above a certain height,
the water water vapour can start
to freeze around the soup particles, leaving the contrails.
So if you ever see an aircraft taking off,
you can watch it, and at some point,
the contrails will start to form.
Now, in terms of radiative forcing,
the worst offender is aircraft induced cloudiness if you're at like 32 33,000 feet.
You can already see here that potentially
moving to a lower altitude might reduce your climate impact.
That also reduces the efficiency of your aircraft.
So let's do a quick run through of
how you can calculate the radiative forcing from each species.
And it's basically a convolution integral over
a year time span or over however long you want to look at typically a year here.
And we have a term here.
We have this term, which is the out this is how much CO two we emitted.
These were the terms we calculated earlier.
This is 3.12 kilos per kilo of fuel we've burnt.
And this is effectively measuring the half life.
So it's a summation of these terms here,
and it's telling us if we've emitted one kilo,
how long does that take to decay away?
And if we integrate over time,
we get our change in CO two in the atmosphere over time.
To convert this into radiative forcing,
we can use this equation,
which uses a estimate for the background concentration of CO two.
If you're emitting CO two, maybe that increases,
but as a first estimate,
you can assume a constant value here.
We plug in our change in the total amount of CO two or concentration of CO two,
and we can get a radiative forcing term for a given year.
That's for CO two,
which has no altitude dependence.
We then have water cut and sulphates.
Again, these don't really show that much of an altitude dependence.
But these are short lived greenhouse gases.
They're only in the atmosphere for weeks or months.
So what we do is we effectively lump them into one term,
like an impulse and radiative forcing for one year.
So there's some reference values which come from literature.
I'll give you the references at the end.
But we take how much we emitted times it by reference values
to give us our radiative forcing for each one of these species.
Then we have aircraft induced cloudiness.
It's a similar story.
We have some reference term for radiative forcing per length.
Now, here, L is the distance flown.
The catch here is we've started to go into something with an altitude dependence.
So this S is the scaling factor with altitude dependence,
which was from this figure.
So this is effectively the length flown at each height over a year.
So once you've done your mission analysis,
you can do a histogram of how long you've spent in,
like, 1,000 foot blocks or something like this.
And then you can use that to calculate
the total radiative forcing from aircraft induced cloudiness.
And then the last one,
I should say, there's other more advanced methods of doing this.
If you want to look into them as a few references as well,
different ways of doing it, but I'm more than happy for you
to use these simplified methods to start with.
And the last one or the fun one is nitrous oxide emissions.
Now, as I said before, these are related to
the turbine the combustor pressure and temperature.
And NOX itself isn't actually a greenhouse gas,
but it's quite a reactive component that has other effects in the atmosphere.
Actually, in the long term,
it has a net cooling effect.
It depletes ozone and methane in the atmosphere.
So you have this convolution integral,
similar to the CO two emissions that gives you
the reduction or the climate cooling effect of the reduction in ozone.
But by far, the biggest effect is the generation of ozone in the short.
And this we model again in a similar way to water, sulphate and sts,
where you have just a reference value times the amount you've generated and
that altitude dependence of ozone, ozone climate forcing.
So I hope you can see there that,
as much as it might seem a complicated process,
actually, there's four species.
Each one has a convolution integral where
it's effectively you're taking some weighted number,
timesing it by the amount you've omitted and integrating it over time,
taking into a fact the half life of each of the species.
So at this point, it's over to you.
For the development phase,
you need to calculate the normalised radiative forcing for each species using
the first equation where
the radiative forcing term comes from the different equations for each species.
From there, you can then calculate the average change, Oh,
the change in temperature on the Earth's surface each year,
and then the average change over 100 year horizon.
And then in the refinement so for the development phase,
just look at Cruz and then in the refinement phase,
you can look at the entire mission instead.
Now, the main references for all this stuff is this Dara paper from 2011.
This was the first one to try and make this form of metric, the ATR metric.
And then there's this really nice paper. I'll give you a hint.
If you look at it, it might help you with other parts of
your design for this aircraft optimization for minimum global warming impact.
I may have similar themes to your entire project,
but I'll leave it there as a link.
Cool.
So that was an overview,
a quick overview and a refresher of mission analysis.
Then laid out how to do rubberization for
turbofan and turboprop engines, climate impacts.
We've gone through what is the climate impact of
aviation and how can we measure it as a metric to the average temperature response.
I laid out what I'm expecting for you from each of
the two sprints in terms of development and refinement.
And the one we didn't touch here is sustainable aviation fuel.
Within your spec, I said you can either use sustainable aviation fuel or kerosene.
I haven't quite decided on the metric I'd like you
to use for life cycle analysis of sustainable aviation fuel,
but I've gotten to your next sprint.
That's fine. So I'll give you a bit of an update then about
how I want you to integrate looking at
the life cycle analysis for sustainable aviation fuel.
Cool. That's all for today.
Does anyone have any questions on that top content?
No, cool. Any more general questions? Wonderful.
There's no town hall today,
so you're free to go,
but are there any general questions for MSC stuff as well?
You can come see me afterwards as well, if there are, as well.
But enjoy a day, then, guys.
I'll see you on Friday Friday.
Hello.
Okay.
So is
there a question or is there a stat? Is it a statement?
Yeah, I tell you folding wing tips is more as you change the span.
It's the same the low parts are changing,
Append they're ground folding they ground
popping all you're doing is holding up when you land.
A you've got to do include a mass at certain spans.
Yeah. So when you move into a wider electrical body,
I think that's fine if you're a group with a fuselage engineer, probably.
Just because if you don't have a fuselage engineer,
when you're doing the wider body stuff, actually,
it's quite hard to be able to quantify
